update: add info to enable/disable Kafka SASL mechanisms (#376)
aiven/aiven-docs: docs/products/kafka/howto/enable-oidc.md

---
title: Enable OAUTH2/OIDC authentication
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import ConsoleLabel from "@site/src/components/ConsoleIcons"
import ConsoleIcon from "@site/src/components/ConsoleIcons"

Aiven for Apache Kafka® enables secure client authentication using OIDC/OAuth2, allowing clients to verify users through an authorization server.

By activating this, you can use
token-based authentication and integrate with identity providers.
Setting the JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) JWKS endpoint via the Aiven console
activates the OIDC mechanism for Kafka, which triggers a rolling restart
of the Kafka brokers. This restart does not cause service downtime.

:::note
To use the `OAUTHBEARER` mechanism, you must enable `kafka_authentication_methods.sasl`.
Additionally, at least one of the SASL mechanisms (PLAIN, SCRAM-SHA-256, or SCRAM-SHA-512)

> must be enabled. For instructions on enabling SASL authentication, see
> [Enabled and configure SASL authentication with Aiven for Apache Kafka®](/docs/products/kafka/howto/kafka-sasl-auth)

Reviewer: Typo and some minor proposal how to make it shorter:
```suggestion
must be enabled. See
[Enable and configure SASL authentication with Aiven for Apache Kafka®](/docs/products/kafka/howto/kafka-sasl-auth).
```

Reviewer: There still seems to be  a typo here: `Enabled`.

Before proceeding with the setup, ensure you have:

> - [Aiven for Apache Kafka®](/docs/products/kafka/get-started) service running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Aiven for Apache Kafka®](/docs/products/kafka/get-started) service running
```

- **Access to an OIDC provider**: Options include Auth0, Okta, Google
  Identity Platform, Azure, or any other OIDC compliant provider.
- Required configuration details from your OIDC provider:
  - **JWKS Endpoint URL**: URL to retrieve the JSON Web Key Set
    (JWKS).

>   - **Subject Claim Name**: Typically `sub`. However, this can vary depending

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
  - **Subject Claim Name**: Typically `sub` but can vary depending
```

    on your OIDC provider.
  - **Issuer URL or Identifier**: Identifies and verifies the JWT
    issuer.
  - **Audience identifiers**: Validates the JWT's intended
    recipients. For multiple audiences, make a note of all.

## Enable OAuth2/OIDC

<Tabs groupId="config-methods">
<TabItem value="console" label="Aiven Console" default>

1. In the [Aiven Console](https://console.aiven.io/), select your

>    project and choose your Aiven for Apache Kafka® service.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
   project and Aiven for Apache Kafka® service.
```

1. Click <ConsoleLabel name="Service settings"/>.
1. Scroll to **Advanced configuration** and click **Configure**.
1. In the **Advanced configuration** window, click
   <ConsoleIcon name="Add config options"/>.
1. Set the OIDC parameters as detailed in the [OIDC Parameters](#oidc-parameters) section.
1. Click **Save configurations**.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="cli" label="CLI">

To enable OAuth2/OIDC authentication for your Aiven for Apache Kafka
service using [Aiven CLI](/docs/tools/cli):

1. Get the name of your Aiven for Apache Kafka service:

   ```bash
   avn service list
   ```

>    Note of the `SERVICE_NAME` corresponding to your Aiven for Apache Kafka service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note the `SERVICE_NAME` corresponding to your Aiven for Apache Kafka service.
```

1. Enable OAuth2/OIDC authentication for your service:

   ```bash
   avn service update <SERVICE_NAME> \
       -c kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_expected_audience="my-audience, another-audience" \
       -c kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_expected_issuer="https://my-issuer.example.com" \
       -c kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_jwks_endpoint_url="https://my-jwks-endpoint.example.com/jwks" \
       -c kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_sub_claim_name="custom-sub"
   ```

For detailed explanations on the OIDC parameters, see the
[OIDC Parameters](#oidc-parameters) section.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## OIDC parameters {#oidc-parameters}

Set the following OIDC parameters:

- `kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_jwks_endpoint_url`
  - **Description**: Endpoint for retrieving the JSON Web Key Set
    (JWKS), which enables OIDC authentication. Corresponds to
    the Apache Kafka parameter
    `sasl.oauthbearer.jwks.endpoint.url`.
  - **Value**: Enter the JWKS endpoint URL provided by your OIDC
    provider.
  - `kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_sub_claim_name` (Optional)
    - **Description**: Name of the JWT's subject claim for broker

>       verification. This is optional and typically set to `sub`.

Reviewer: nit: you've already informed it's optional
```suggestion
      verification. It's typically set to `sub`.
```

      Corresponds to the Apache Kafka parameter
      `sasl.oauthbearer.sub.claim.name`.
    - **Value**: Enter `sub` or the specific claim name provided
      by your OIDC provider if different.
  - `kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_expected_issuer` (Optional)
    - **Description**: Specifies the JWT's issuer for the broker to
      verify. Corresponds to the Apache Kafka parameter

>       `sasl.oauthbearer.expected.issuer`. This setting is
>       optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      `sasl.oauthbearer.expected.issuer`.
```

    - **Value**: Enter the issuer URL or identifier provided by your
      OIDC provider.
  - `kafka.sasl_oauthbearer_expected_audience` (Optional)
    - **Description**: Validates the intended JWT audience for the
      broker. Corresponds to the Apache Kafka parameter

>       `sasl.oauthbearer.expected.audience`. This is optional and
>       is used if your OIDC provider specifies an audience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      `sasl.oauthbearer.expected.audience`. It's used if your OIDC provider specifies an audience.
```
